Flyer U-183-0596
nasa.txt

A Synopsis of NASA's Report: 
"Impact of Ada and Object-Oriented Design in the Flight 
Dynamics Division at Goddard Space Flight Center"

Software Engineering Laboratory Series, SEL-95-001, March 1995.
Synopsis by Ann Brandon
Contributors to this report:
Sharon Waligora, Computer Sciences Corporation
John Baily, Software Metrics, Inc.
Mike Stark, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center

Influencing Software Development

A decade after NASA's Flight Dynamics Division (FDD) at 
Goddard Space Flight Center began investigating the use of 
Ada, the language influences every software development 
project at the FDD.  Object oriented design (OOD) techniques 
were introduced simultaneously with Ada, which combined into 
software engineering principals of portability, legibility, 
and the wide-spread use of generics.  Adhering to those 
principals has increased the FDD's reuse of software by 300 
percent.  It has reduced the costs of all systems, 
independent of their language, by 40 percent; shortened 
their cycle time by 25 percent; and slashed error rates by 
62 percent.

The FDD managers and programmers who were exposed to the 
successful Ada projects -- 15 in total since 1985 -- learned 
not only a new programming vocabulary but also a whole new 
way of structuring software.  They found that the modern 
design methods, which concentrated on generic packages, 
information, hiding, domain analysis, and data abstraction, 
also improved FORTRAN software.

The object-oriented FORTRAN systems have generated 
reusable code and, in comparison with their structurally 
designed counterparts, reduced cycle times and lowered error 
rates.  When compared with a 1985 baseline, the FORTRAN 
systems also improved in schedule duration and in quality, 
which was attributed to the increased levels of reuse in 
their development.

However, the systems did not show the reduction in cost 
that was found in the OOD Ada systems.  Recent projects have 
increased in costs because of the overhead in maintaining 
FORTRAN reuse libraries.  They are more expensive than Ada 
libraries, because generic components written in Ada can 
perform more functions in fewer lines of code.

Despite the language's well-documented advantages over 
FORTRAN, only 15 to 20-percent of the Goddard division's 
software is actually written in Ada.  The percentage would 
probably be higher if FORTRAN were not so well established 
in both existing systems, accounting for 80 percent of 
current projects, and in the large library of reusable 
components; if Ada was compatible to the IBM mainframe 
architecture and affordable on workstations; if the small 
minorities pushing for and against Ada had not been so 
adamant in their arguments; and if the language were not now 
facing new competition from C and C++.
	
Software Development in Ada

The FDD develops two similar software systems in Ada, 
telemetry and dynamic simulators.  Telemetry simulators 
model and pack into streams a spacecraft's attitude sensors. 
They are used primarily before launch to test a spacecraft's 
Attitude Ground Support System (AGSS), for training 
exercises, and to test modifications to the AGSS during 
missions.  Dynamic simulators are used both in pre-launch 
and during mission emergencies to test the robustness and 
reaction of the spacecraft's attitude control system.  They 
can model the spacecraft's behavior under normal and 
degraded conditions, such as failed sensors or thrusters.

The FDD attempted a scientific experiment to test the 
feasibility of using Ada in July 1988, when it developed a 
parallel project in FORTRAN.  The Ada prototype of a 
telemetry simulator, called Gamma Ray Observatory Attitude 
Dynamics Simulator (GRODY), was not held to the same 
constraints of performance and deadlines as the FORTRAN 
project, GROSS.  The software engineers wanted time and 
freedom enough in which to learn both a new language, Ada 
rather than FORTRAN, and a new design method, object 
oriented rather than structural analysis.  One of the 
lessons of GRODY was that nesting packages reduced the 
software's reusability.

The next telemetry simulators written in Ada included 
the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-I 
(GOES-I) dynamics simulator (GOADA), and the GOES-I 
telemetry simulator (GOESIM), which was the FDD's first 
operational Ada software.  The design teams increased 
reusability and reduced the compilation overhead by creating 
library rather than nested packages.  With GOESIM, they met 
their goals of producing on time and within budget the FDD's 
first telemetry simulator in Ada.

Finally, an FDD team, which included experienced Ada 
programmers, took a technological leap in designing the 
Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite Telemetry Simulator 
(UARSTELS).  They chose a generic architecture that would 
optimize "verbatim reuse," which is defined as reusing a 
component without editing it.  Another similar Ada project 
loomed, the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) telemetry 
simulator (EUVETELS), for which the team hoped to reuse much 
of UARSTELS' code.  Therefore, rather than concern 
themselves with reusing code from the previous projects, the 
engineers designed UARSTEL instead for future reuse.  They 
performed domain analysis simultaneously for UARS and EUVE, 
and emphasized Ada generics that could be used in both 
spacecrafts' simulators with no code modification.  
Tailoring the packages to each simulator only required 
parameterized instatiation.

UARSTELS' performance and schedule were on target, 
proving that designing for verbatim reuse is an efficient 
way to code in Ada.  Another finding was that while UARSTELS 
(68 KSLOC) was smaller than GOESIM (92 KSLOC), it performed 
more functions, for which it needed substantially more 
memory.

The FDD's post-UARSTELS telemetry simulators took full 
advantage of reusing Ada's generic packages.  In the year 
1989-1990, 96-percent of EUVETELS' 67 KSLOC was reused from 
UARSTELS, of which 88-percent was verbatim reuse.  In 1990-
1991, the SAMPEX Telemetry Simulator (SAMPEXTS) minimized 
development costs while maximizing software reuse.  UARSTELS 
and EUVETELS contributed to 95-percent of SAMPEXTS' 60 
KSLOC, with 85-percent being reused verbatim.

The WIND/POLAR Telemetry Simulator (POWITS -- 1990-1992) 
differed enough from the UARSTELS to reduce the percentage 
of reuse.  Also, the development team was new and had to 
relearn the generic architecture from scratch.  Still, 
POWITS reused 69-percent of UARSTELS' code, 39-percent with 
verbatim reuse, and was only a thousand SLOC more than 
EUVETELS.

Finally, the FAST Telemetry Simulator (FASTELS) and the 
TOMS Telemetry Simulator (TOMSTELS) were expected to be 
acceptably operational within a short schedule in the year 
1992-1993.  The team modified the high-reuse process, 
deleted one design phase, and held only one design review.  
Despite the changes, the two projects still met the deadline 
and performance requirements.

In fact, optimizing reuse was sacrificed in TOMSTELS and 
FASTELS to focus on and improve performance.  One of the 
motivations behind conducting the SEL study was to determine 
if the FDD should pursue performance over reuse, since the 
two projects' improved performance made the reduction in 
reuse worthwhile to the users.

Thus in 1993, as the FASTELS and TOMSTELS systems were 
completed, the FDD started using Ada regularly for a certain 
class of systems.  It was a full five years after the 
language's introduction, and the laboratories did not 
produce a standard process for Ada projects for another two 
years.
	
Accepting Ada

The slow acceptance of Ada can be attributed partly to 
the loose management of the first project, GRODY.  While the 
software engineers were able to explore the new technology, 
there were poor comparisons with the parallel development in 
FORTRAN, which was held to tight schedule and performance 
criteria.  Moreover, the two systems, designed to address 
the same problem, were developed with different goals:  the 
FORTRAN system was developed to function, the Ada system was 
developed to teach.  One of the next projects designed for 
reuse, GOADA, proved to be the slowest simulator in FDD 
history.

Another factor in Ada's slow acceptance was the 
affordability and quality of available Ada development 
environments.  Compiler problems and a lack of diagnostic 
and library management tools especially affected an attempt 
to rehost a system from a VAX to an IBM mainframe.  FORTRAN 
development, in contrast, requires little or no external 
tool support.

Finally, Ada faces sentiment common to almost all new 
technology insertion.  There are always a few that stand 
vehemently against change, especially against the adoption 
of a new language.

Overcoming these first impressions and obstacles was a 
monumental task, one which resident Ada experts did not 
perform well.  Even though the next telemetry simulators 
written in Ada had high reuse, acceptable performance, and 
were delivered on time, their success did not completely 
erase the idea that Ada was experimental.
	
To date, the FDD has produced about one million lines of 
Ada.  Performance tests are no longer run on Ada simulators, 
even though the requirements have increased for speed and 
functionality.  The decreased costs of reusing Ada code, 
rather than FORTRAN code, are well documented and 
publicized.
	
The Role of the Software Developer

Both the Ada naysayers and the Ada evangelists acted to 
undermine the language's acceptance.  The naysayers resisted 
the language change, preferring to stay with FORTRAN, a 
language with which the developers were familiar and for 
which they had an extensive library of reusable components, 
maintained by a separately funded team.  The Ada evangelists 
promised too much too soon and, when problems arose, avoided 
confronting the real obstacles to the language's acceptance:  
the lack of an environment designed for the IBM mainframe, 
on which FDD developed most of its software.

The Ada education program was ineffectual because of the 
student developers' desire to preserve the status quo.  
Rather than using resident Ada experts as instructors, 
trainers from outside the company might have had more 
success teaching students.  The training graduates who had 
the opportunity to engage in real-life development were the 
most enthusiastic about using the Ada language in other 
projects; those with classroom experience alone, or who were 
self-taught, often expressed a preference that the FDD stay 
a FORTRAN shop.

Conclusions

Software Metrics, the consulting firm that researched the 
Software Engineering Laboratory (SEL) report, recommended 
that the FDD continue to use Ada whenever possible.  
Projects most likely to derive the full benefits of  Ada are 
long-lived, developed by reusing existing Ada modules, and 
deployed on Ada-capable platforms.  In contrast, FORTRAN is 
economically best suited for short-lived, single-use 
software.

As the FDD turns more to workstations, it will probably 
use Ada more frequently, and replace FORTRAN in the 
divisions large reusable libraries.  Switching the libraries 
to Ada and retaining a crew of software librarians would 
reduce the cost of both FORTRAN and Ada programs.  FORTRAN 
is expensive to maintain because of the high coupling found 
in its systems; replacing it altogether with Ada would 
reduce costs immediately.  The software librarians trained 
in Ada reuse would understand the architectures and 
parameters of the generic code; in previous projects, the 
development team had to rediscover these with each new 
telemetry simulator.  A reuse library is also necessary for 
configuration management to be economically efficient, 
especially as the Ada projects grow in lines of code and 
complexity.

The up-and-coming competitor for Ada is C++.  Because 
Ada environments for workstations generally cost 4 to 5 
times as much as those for C++ and because many programmers 
consider C++ to be more broadly marketable, the Ada language 
has still not yet fully won the battle.

Since 1990, the FDD has built all of its telemetry 
simulators in Ada.  The software now costs 40 percent less 
to produce, is delivered in half the time, and has 85 
percent fewer errors during development when compared with 
the 1985 baseline for the systems.

For more information:

"The Software Engineering Laboratory has published a series 
of  reports, including this one, on the effects, successes, 
and failures of  various software development methodologies 
at the GSFC.  The SEL is accessible on the World Wide Web at 
http://groucho.gsfc.nasa.gov/Code_550/SEL_hp.html
Single copies of this report (Software Engineering 
Laboratory  Series, SEL-95-001) are available if you write to:
 
Software Engineering Branch -- Code 552
Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, MD  20771


********************** 
The views, opinions, and findings contained in this report are those of 
the author(s) and should not be construed as an official Agency 
position, policy, or decision, unless so designated by other official 
documentation.

Copyright 1996.  IIT Research Institute.  All rights assigned to the 
U.S. Government (Ada Joint Program Office).  Permission to reprint this 
flyer, in whole or in part, is granted, provided the AdaIC is 
acknowledged as the source.
**********************

Ada Information Clearinghouse (AdaIC)
P.O. Box 1866
Falls Church, VA  22041
Telephone:  1-800-AdaIC-11 (1-800/232-4211) or 703/681-2466
Fax:  703/681-2869
E-mail:  adainfo@sw-eng.falls-church.va.us

The AdaIC is sponsored by the Ada Joint Program Office and operated by 
IIT Research Institute.
